# Octal Numbers

The octal number system is composed of eight digits, which are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Counting in octal is like counting in decimal, except that the digits 8 and 9 are not used.

## Octal to Decimal Conversion:
It is accomplished by multiplying each digit by its weight an summing the products.

Example: Convert 2374(8) to decimal.

see pdf

## Decimal to Octal Conversion: Repeated division by 8

To convert the decimal number to octal, begin by dividing decimal number by 8. Then divide each resulting quotient by 8 until there is a 0 whole number quotient.

The remainders generated by each division for the octal number.

The first remainder to be produced is the LSD (Least significant digit), and the last remainder to be produced is the MSD (Most significant digit).

Example: convert the decimal number 359 to octal by repeated division by 8.
(3 = MSD, 9 = LSD)

**QUOTIENT** *REMAINDER*
359/8 = **44***.875*
44/8 = **5***.5*
5/8 = **0***.625*

0 Whole Number Quotient

From Remainder:

0.875 \* 8 = 7 (LSD)
0.5 \* 8 = 4
0.625 \* 8 = 5 (MSD)

547(8) == 359(10)

## Octal to Binary Conversion:

Each octal digit can be represented by a 3-bit binary number, to convert an octal number to binary number, simply replace each octal digit with the appropriate three bits.

Octal/binary conversion:

```
Octal Digit:   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7
Binary Digit: 000 001 010 011 100 101 110 111
```
Example: Convert each of the following octal numbers to binary:
see pdf

## Binary to Octal conversion

Start with the right-most group of three bits and, moving from right to left, convert each 3-bit group to the equivalent octal digit.

Example: Convert each of the following binary numbers to octal:
a. 110101 b. 11010000100

See PDF

# Binary Coded Decimal
Binary coded decimal (BCD) is a way to express each of the decimal digits with a binary code.

There are only ten code groups in the BCD system, so it is very easy to convert between decimal and BCD.

In BCD, 4 bit represent each decimal digit.

The six code combinations that are not used-- 1010, 1011, 1100, 1101, 1110, and 1111-- are invalid in the 8421 BCD code.

```
Decimal Digit:    0    1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9
BCD:		0000 0001 0010 0011 0100 0101 0110 0111 1000 1001
```

Decimal to BCD conversion: To express any decimal number in BCD, simply replace each decimal digit with the appropriate 4-bit code.
Convert the following decimal numbers to BCD:

a. 35(10) = 0011 0101
b. 170(10) = 0001 0111 0000

## BCD to Decimal Conversion
Start at the right-most bit and break the code into groups of four bits. Then writ ethe decimal digit represented by each 4 bit group.

Example: Convert each of the following BCD codes to decimal:

a. 10000110

1000 0110 = 86(10)

b. 001101010001

0011 0101 0001 = 351(10)
